hey welcome to my first question and
answer video this is something I'm going
to start doing a little more often as I
get a lot of questions through my
YouTube account in an email and I think
this would be a good way for me to stay
active on my blog without having to you
know create all these extensive lessons
so let's get to the first question
gentleman from Austria writes and I'm
just gonna take samples of this email
here a topic that really keeps
intriguing me as your concept of mixing
Pentatonix if you want to know exactly
what i'm referring to go to your lesson
number five the one on regazzi patterns
at about 851 you seem to leave the c
minor pentatonic mmm and then later he
says could you possibly do another
lesson on this concept maybe using it to
get sort of outside soloing over a jazz
standard and not only on a one chord
vamp okay so I think the first thing I
should address there is that I think the
vamp in that video was an F 7th vamp not
a C minor vamp but they're pretty
closely related so I can kind of
understand that but um the first thing
I'd say is make sure you take a look at
the pentatonic videos that I've already
done so just go to my homepage on
YouTube and search for the pentatonic
videos but I do think it's a good
question so why don't we take a look at
a standard right now and in some ways
you might play Pentatonix on top of it
alright so for this example I'm going to
use a video I already have lying around
where I'm kind of practicing some of
this stuff on have you met Miss Jones so
I'm just going to show you the first two
a sections that are not going to go
beyond the bridge and the first a
section I play like fairly straight
ahead and then I was trying to do some
of the pentatonic ideas on the beginning
of the second a section here so I'm just
going to play it for you and then I'll
talk to you a little bit about it
okay so what I've done here is I've
transcribed the first three bars of the
second a section and this is where I was
trying to do a lot of the pentatonic
ideas that I think you're referencing in
your question so let's just take a look
at the first bar and so what I've
written here is the original chord
changes like the ones that appear in the
real book which aren't necessarily the
chord changes that I use but you know a
lot of people do so I put them in there
and then below that I put the actual
chords that I'm implying and then
further below that I label where I put
the pentatonic scales so in the the
first bar let's talk about this is
really important because this is the
first way in which you would imply
pentatonix outside of the key and that's
what's called the side slip and so what
I do here is I actually use a pentatonic
a half step above the root of the chord
in the second half of the measure and
you know that's just something that
gives you sort of a heightened sensation
I think when you when you do that and I
think it's really important to think
about where the line is going so
oftentimes like where I would do that
would be when you have a one chord and
then a 2/5 that's related to a
proceeding so for example like I'd play
F and then the F sharp pentatonic and
then go to the G minor next and you have
like this really nice chromatic line
which is going the other way in this
case it's not quite that but I think the
notes are closely related enough that it
makes sense at least in my ear so yeah
basically I play F major pentatonic and
then I just completely sideslip out a
half step above and all those notes in
the second part are completely outside
now let's talk about the second measure
here because this is where things you
know may seem more outside than they
really are
just because the context in what you're
hearing it so what what this kind of
pentatonic effect is is it's different
it's not outside the key it's just
implying tensions on top of a cord so
the court stated here is f sharp
diminish
but I I don't play F sharp diminished on
this tune in the second bar I play D
seven flat nine flat 13 and that really
is just a chord that's contained within
the F sharp diminished so like when I'm
comping I'm not going to play a big
clunky diminished chord myself I'm gonna
usually play something that's inside if
you look at the construction of the
diminished scale you have all these
related triads and this dominant seven
which is related to it so I'm not really
playing a pentatonic scale I mean the
first four notes there I'm playing a
flat 13 and then I'm playing a flat nine
the third and then the root then the
next part of the chord I play F minor on
top of that and so that's giving me if
we were gonna relate that to D seven
that's giving me the flat seventh and
the flat five and the flat nine and then
the sharp nine there and then if you
know and then the next measure I'm just
kind of going back into G minor seven so
I don't want you to think that I'm
really thinking of some big fancy theory
of stacking substitution upon
substitution it may seem that way but
honestly what I'm really thinking is D
seven flat nine flat thirteen is the
related chord to the F sharp diminished
and I'm playing the pentatonic up a
minor third and so it's it's creating
this line which seems to have a lot of
tension and the implied chord is f minor
7th there but in all honesty I'm really
thinking more in terms of just the F
minor triad and the F minor pentatonic
alright so I hope that answers your
question
hope you guys enjoyed the video if you
have any more questions send them my way
and I'll make some more videos